3.2 Challenges in the human environment This unit is concerned with human processes, systems and outcomes and how these change both spatially and temporally. They are studied in a variety of places and at a range of scales and must include places in various states of development, such as higher income countries (HICs), lower income countries (LICs) and newly emerging economies (NEEs). The aims of this unit are to develop an understanding of the factors that produce a diverse variety of human environments; the dynamic nature of these environments that change over time and place; the need for sustainable management; and the areas of current and future challenge and opportunity for these environments. 3.2.1 Section A: Urban issues and challenges In this section, students are required to study all the themes. Key idea Specification content A growing percentage of the world’s population lives in urban areas. The global pattern of urban change. Urban trends in different parts of the world including HICs and LICs. Factors affecting the rate of urbanisation – migration (push–pull theory), natural increase. The emergence of megacities. Urban growth creates opportunities and challenges for cities in LICs and NEEs . A case study of a major city in an LIC or NEE to illustrate: the location and importance of the city, regionally , nationally and internationally causes of growth: natural increase and migration how urban growth has created opportunities: social: access to services – health and education; access to resources – water supply, energy economic: how urban industrial areas can be a stimulus for economic development how urban growth has created challenges: managing urban growth – slums, squatter settlements providing clean water, sanitation systems and energy providing access to services – health and education reducing unemployment and crime managing environmental issues – waste disposal, air and water pollution, traffic congestion. An example of how urban planning is improving the quality of life for the urban poor. Urban change in cities in the UK leads to a variety of social, economic and environmental opportunities and challenges. Overview of the distribution of population and the major cities in the UK. A case study of a major city in the UK to illustrate: the location and importance of the city in the UK and the wider world impacts of national and international migration on the growth and character of the city how urban change has created opportunities: social and economic: cultural mix, recreation and entertainment, employment, integrated transport systems environmental: urban greening how urban change has created challenges: social and economic: urban deprivation , inequalities in housing, education, health and employment environmental: dereliction, building on brownfield and greenfield sites, waste disposal the impact of urban sprawl on the rural–urban fringe, and the growth of commuter settlements. An example of an urban regeneration project to show: reasons why the area needed regeneration the main features of the project. Urban sustainability requires management of resources and transport. Features of sustainable urban living: water and energy conservation waste recycling creating green space. How urban transport strategies are used to reduce traffic congestion. 3.2.2 Section B: The changing economic world In this section, students are required to study all the themes. Key idea Specification content There are global variations in economic development and quality of life. Different ways of classifying parts of the world according to their level of economic development and quality of life. Different economic and social measures of development: gross national income (GNI) per head, birth and death rates, infant mortality, life expectancy, people per doctor, literacy rates, access to safe water, Human Development Index (HDI). Limitations of economic and social measures. Link between stages of the Demographic Transition Model and the level of development. Causes of uneven development: physical, economic and historical. Consequences of uneven development: disparities in wealth and health, international migration . Various strategies exist for reducing the global development gap. An overview of the strategies used to reduce the development gap: investment, industrial development and tourism, aid, using intermediate technology, fairtrade, debt relief, microfinance loans. An example of how the growth of tourism in an LIC or NEE helps to reduce the development gap. Some LICs and NEEs are experiencing rapid economic development which leads to significant social, environmental and cultural change. A case study of one LIC or NEE to illustrate: the location and importance of the country, regionally and globally the wider political, social, cultural and environmental context within which the country is placed the changing industrial structure. The balance between different sectors of the economy. How manufacturing industry can stimulate economic development the role of transnational corporations (TNCs) in relation to industrial development. Advantages and disadvantages of TNC(s) to the host country the changing political and trading relationships with the wider world international aid: types of aid, impacts of aid on the receiving country the environmental impacts of economic development the effects of economic development on quality of life for the population. Major changes in the economy of the UK have affected, and will continue to affect, employment patterns and regional growth. Economic futures in the UK: causes of economic change: de-industrialisation and decline of traditional industrial base, globalisation and government policies moving towards a post-industrial economy: development of information technology, service industries, finance, research, science and business parks impacts of industry on the physical environment. An example of how modern industrial development can be more environmentally sustainable social and economic changes in the rural landscape in one area of population growth and one area of population decline improvements and new developments in road and rail infrastructure, port and airport capacity the north–south divide. Strategies used in an attempt to resolve regional differences the place of the UK in the wider world. Links through trade, culture, transport, and electronic communication. Economic and political links: the European Union (EU) and Commonwealth. 3.2.3 Section C: The challenge of resource management In this section, students are required to study Resource management and one from Food or Water or Energy . 3.2.3.1 Resource management Key idea Specification content Food, water and energy are fundamental to human development. The significance of food, water and energy to economic and social well-being. An overview of global inequalities in the supply and consumption of resources. The changing demand and provision of resources in the UK create opportunities and challenges. An overview of resources in relation to the UK. Food: the growing demand for high-value food exports from low income countries and all-year demand for seasonal food and organic produce larger carbon footprints due to the increasing number of ‘food miles’ travelled, and moves towards local sourcing of food the trend towards agribusiness. Water: the changing demand for water water quality and pollution management matching supply and demand – areas of deficit and surplus the need for transfer to maintain supplies. Energy: the changing energy mix – reliance on fossil fuels, growing significance of renewables reduced domestic supplies of coal, gas and oil economic and environmental issues associated with exploitation of energy sources. 3.2.3.2 Food Key idea Specification content Demand for food resources is rising globally but supply can be insecure, which may lead to conflict. Areas of surplus (security) and deficit (insecurity): global patterns of calorie intake and food supply reasons for increasing food consumption: economic development, rising population factors affecting food supply: climate, technology, pests and disease, water stress, conflict, poverty. Impacts of food insecurity – famine, undernutrition, soil erosion, rising prices, social unrest. Different strategies can be used to increase food supply. Overview of strategies to increase food supply: irrigation, aeroponics and hydroponics, the new green revolution and use of biotechnology, appropriate technology an example of a large scale agricultural development to show how it has both advantages and disadvantages. Moving towards a sustainable resource future: the potential for sustainable food supplies: organic farming, permaculture , urban farming initiatives, fish and meat from sustainable sources, seasonal food consumption, reduced waste and losses an example of a local scheme in an LIC or NEE to increase sustainable supplies of food. 3.2.3.3 Water Key idea Specification content Demand for water resources is rising globally but supply can be insecure, which may lead to conflict. Areas of surplus (security) and deficit (insecurity): global patterns of water surplus and deficit reasons for increasing water consumption: economic development, rising population factors affecting water availability: climate, geology, pollution of supply, over-abstraction, limited infrastructure, poverty. Impacts of water insecurity – waterborne disease and water pollution, food production, industrial output, potential for conflict where demand exceeds supply. Different strategies can be used to increase water supply. Overview of strategies to increase water supply: diverting supplies and increasing storage, dams and reservoirs, water transfers and desalination an example of a large scale water transfer scheme to show how its development has both advantages and disadvantages. Moving towards a sustainable resource future: water conservation, groundwater management, recycling, ‘grey’ water an example of a local scheme in an LIC or NEE to increase sustainable supplies of water. 3.2.3.4 Energy Key idea Specification content Demand for energy resources is rising globally but supply can be insecure, which may lead to conflict. Areas of surplus (security) and deficit (insecurity): global distribution of energy consumption and supply reasons for increasing energy consumption: economic development, rising population, technology factors affecting energy supply: physical factors, cost of exploitation and production, technology and political factors. Impacts of energy insecurity – exploration of difficult and environmentally sensitive areas, economic and environmental costs, food production, industrial output, potential for conflict where demand exceeds supply. Different strategies can be used to increase energy supply. Overview of strategies to increase energy supply: renewable (biomass, wind, hydro, tidal, geothermal, wave and solar) and non-renewable (fossil fuels and nuclear power) sources of energy an example to show how the extraction of a fossil fuel has both advantages and disadvantages. Moving towards a sustainable resource future: individual energy use and carbon footprints. Energy conservation: designing homes, workplaces and transport for sustainability, demand reduction, use of technology to increase efficiency in the use of fossil fuels an example of a local renewable energy scheme in an LIC or NEE to provide sustainable supplies of energy.
3.3 Geographical applications The Geographical applications unit is designed to be synoptic in that students will be required to draw together knowledge, understanding and skills from the full course of study . It is an opportunity for students to show their breadth of understanding and an evaluative appreciation of the interrelationships between different aspects of geographical study. 3.3.1 Section A: Issue evaluation This section contributes a critical thinking and problem-solving element to the assessment structure. The assessment will provide students with the opportunity to demonstrate geographical skills and applied knowledge and understanding by looking at a particular issue(s) derived from the specification using secondary sources. The issue(s) will arise from any aspect of the compulsory sections of the subject content but may extend beyond it through the use of resources in relation to specific unseen contexts. Students develop knowledge and understanding of physical geography themes in unit 3.1 and human geography themes in unit 3.2. This section is synoptic and the assessment will require students to use their learning of more than one of the themes in units 3.1 and 3.2 so that they can analyse a geographical issue at a range of scales, consider and select a possible option in relation to the issue(s) and justify their decision. A resource booklet will be available twelve weeks before the date of the exam so that students have the opportunity to work through the resources, enabling them to become familiar with the material . Students will not be allowed to take the original resource booklet into the examination room but will be issued with a clean copy in the exam. Sources could include maps at different scales, diagrams, graphs, statistics, photographs, satellite images, sketches, extracts from published materials, and quotes from different interest groups. Assessment will consist of a series of questions related to a contemporary geographical issue(s), leading to a more extended piece of writing which will involve an evaluative judgement. Students will apply knowledge and understanding to interpret, analyse and evaluate the information and issue(s) in the pre-release resources booklet and the question paper. They will also use geographical skills to set the issue(s) in context and to examine conflicting viewpoints about the issue(s). Students will develop a critical perspective on the issue(s) studied, consider the points of view of the stakeholders involved, make an appraisal of the advantages and disadvantages, and evaluate the alternatives. The exam will also require students to consider physical and human interrelationships and to make reasoned justifications for proposed solutions in terms of their likely impact on both people and the physical environment. 3.3.2 Section B: Fieldwork Students need to undertake two geographical enquiries , each of which must include the use of primary data, collected as part of a fieldwork exercise. There should be a clear link between the subject content and geographical enquiries , and the enquiries can be based on any part of the content addressed in units 3.1 and 3.2. Fieldwork must take place outside the classroom and school grounds on at least two occasions. The two enquiries must be carried out in contrasting environments and show an understanding of both physical and human geography. In at least one of the enquiries students are expected to show an understanding about the interaction between physical and human geography. Students’ understanding of the enquiry process will be assessed in the following two ways: questions based on the use of fieldwork materials from an unfamiliar context questions based on students’ individual enquiry work. For these questions students will have to identify the titles of their individual enquiries. Students will be expected to: apply knowledge and understanding to interpret, analyse and evaluate information and issues related to geographical enquiry select, adapt and use a variety of skills and techniques to investigate questions and issues and communicate findings in relation to geographical enquiry. Geographical enquiry strand Application of knowledge and understanding, and skills 1. Suitable question for geographical enquiry The factors that need to be considered when selecting suitable questions /hypotheses for geographical enquiry. The geographical theory/concept underpinning the enquiry. Appropriate sources of primary and secondary evidence, including locations for fieldwork. The potential risks of both human and physical fieldwork and how these risks might be reduced. 2. Selecting, measuring and recording data appropriate to the chosen enquiry Difference between primary and secondary data. Identification and selection of appropriate physical and human data. Measuring and recording data using different sampling methods. Description and justification of data collection methods. 3. Selecting appropriate ways of processing and presenting fieldwork data Appreciation that a range of visual, graphical and cartographic methods is available. Selection and accurate use of appropriate presentation methods. Description, explanation and adaptation of presentation methods 4. Describing, analysing and explaining fieldwork data Description, analysis and explanation of the results of fieldwork data. Establish links between data sets. Use appropriate statistical techniques. Identification of anomalies in fieldwork data. 5. Reaching conclusions Draw evidenced conclusions in relation to original aims of the enquiry. 6. Evaluation of geographical enquiry Identification of problems of data collection methods. Identification of limitations of data collected. Suggestions for other data that might be useful. Extent to which conclusions were reliable. Fieldwork is an essential aspect of geography. It ensures that students are given the opportunity to consolidate and extend their geographical understanding by relating learning to real experiences of the world. Schools and colleges must submit a written statement as evidence that the fieldwork requirement has been met . The statement must record the date, location, numbers of students participating, the main issues/questions investigated and the part of the specification content to which the fieldwork is linked. The statement must be signed by the Head of Centre. Any failure to provide this statement in a timely manner will be treated as malpractice or maladministration (under Ofqual's General Condition A8 (Malpractice and maladministration) ).
3.4 Geographical skills Students are required to develop and demonstrate a range of geographical skills, including cartographic, graphical, numerical and statistical skills, throughout their study of the specification. Skills will be assessed in all three written exams. Ordnance Survey (OS) maps or other map extracts may be used in any of the three exams. 3.4.1 Cartographic skills Cartographic skills relating to a variety of maps at different scales. Atlas maps: use and understand coordinates – latitude and longitude recognise and describe distributions and patterns of both human and physical features maps based on global and other scales may be used and students may be asked to identify and describe significant features of the physical and human landscape on them, eg population distribution, population movements, transport networks, settlement layout, relief and drainage analyse the inter-relationship between physical and human factors on maps and establish associations between observed patterns on thematic maps. Ordnance Survey maps: use and interpret OS maps at a range of scales, including 1:50 000 and 1:25 000 and other maps appropriate to the topic use and understand coordinates – four and six-figure grid references use and understand scale, distance and direction – measure straight and curved line distances using a variety of scales use and understand gradient, contour and spot height numerical and statistical information identify basic landscape features and describe their characteristics from map evidence identify major relief features on maps and relate cross-sectional drawings to relief features draw inferences about the physical and human landscape by interpretation of map evidence, including patterns of relief, drainage, settlement, communication and land-use interpret cross sections and transects of physical and human landscapes describe the physical features as they are shown on large scale maps of two of the following landscapes – coastlines, fluvial and glacial landscapes infer human activity from map evidence, including tourism. Maps in association with photographs: be able to compare maps sketch maps: draw, label, understand and interpret photographs: use and interpret ground, aerial and satellite photographs describe human and physical landscapes (landforms, natural vegetation, land-use and settlement) and geographical phenomena from photographs draw sketches from photographs label and annotate diagrams, maps, graphs, sketches and photographs. 3.4.2 Graphical skills Graphical skills to: select and construct appropriate graphs and charts to present data, using appropriate scales – line charts, bar charts, pie charts, pictograms, histograms with equal class intervals, divided bar, scattergraphs, and population pyramids suggest an appropriate form of graphical representation for the data provided complete a variety of graphs and maps – choropleth, isoline, dot maps, desire lines, proportional symbols and flow lines use and understand gradient, contour and value on isoline maps plot information on graphs when axes and scales are provided interpret and extract information from different types of maps, graphs and charts, including population pyramids, choropleth maps, flow-line maps, dispersion graphs. 3.4.3 Numerical skills Numerical skills to: demonstrate an understanding of number, area and scales, and the quantitative relationships between units design fieldwork data collection sheets and collect data with an understanding of accuracy, sample size and procedures, control groups and reliability understand and correctly use proportion and ratio, magnitude and frequency draw informed conclusions from numerical data. 3.4.4 Statistical skills Statistical skills to: use appropriate measures of central tendency, spread and cumulative frequency (median, mean, range, quartiles and inter-quartile range, mode and modal class) calculate percentage increase or decrease and understand the use of percentiles describe relationships in bivariate data: sketch trend lines through scatter plots, draw estimated lines of best fit, make predictions, interpolate and extrapolate trends be able to identify weaknesses in selective statistical presentation of data. 3.4.5 Use of qualitative and quantitative data Use of qualitative and quantitative data from both primary and secondary sources to obtain, illustrate, communicate, interpret, analyse and evaluate geographical information. Examples of types of data: maps fieldwork data geo-spatial data presented in a geographical information system (GIS) framework satellite imagery written and digital sources visual and graphical sources numerical and statistical information. 3.4.6 Formulate enquiry and argument Students should demonstrate the ability to: identify questions and sequences of enquiry write descriptively, analytically and critically communicate their ideas effectively develop an extended written argument draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical questions and issues. 3.4.7 Literacy Most communication is through the written word, raising the importance of good literacy skills. Students should be able to communicate information in ways suitable for a range of target audiences.
3.1 Living with the physical environment This unit is concerned with the dynamic nature of physical processes and systems, and human interaction with them in a variety of places and at a range of scales. The aims of this unit are to develop an understanding of the tectonic, geomorphological, biological and meteorological processes and features in different environments, and the need for management strategies governed by sustainability and consideration of the direct and indirect effects of human interaction with the Earth and the atmosphere. 3.1.1 Section A: The challenge of natural hazards In this section, students are required to study all the themes. 3.1.1.1 Natural hazards Key idea Specification content Natural hazards pose major risks to people and property. Definition of a natural hazard. Types of natural hazard. Factors affecting hazard risk. 3.1.1.2 Tectonic hazards Key idea Specification content Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are the result of physical processes. Plate tectonics theory. Global distribution of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions and their relationship to plate margins . Physical processes taking place at different types of plate margin (constructive, destructive and conservative) that lead to earthquakes and volcanic activity. The effects of, and responses to, a tectonic hazard vary between areas of contrasting levels of wealth. Primary and secondary effects of a tectonic hazard. Immediate and long-term responses to a tectonic hazard. Use named examples to show how the effects and responses to a tectonic hazard vary between two areas of contrasting levels of wealth. Management can reduce the effects of a tectonic hazard . Reasons why people continue to live in areas at risk from a tectonic hazard . How monitoring, prediction, protection and planning can reduce the risks from a tectonic hazard. 3.1.1.3 Weather hazards Key idea Specification content Global atmospheric circulation helps to determine patterns of weather and climate. General atmospheric circulation model: pressure belts and surface winds. Tropical storms (hurricanes, cyclones, typhoons) develop as a result of particular physical conditions. Global distribution of tropical storms (hurricanes, cyclones, typhoons). An understanding of the relationship between tropical storms and general atmospheric circulation. Causes of tropical storms and the sequence of their formation and development. The structure and features of a tropical storm. How climate change might affect the distribution, frequency and intensity of tropical storms. Tropical storms have significant effects on people and the environment . Primary and secondary effects of tropical storms. Immediate and long-term responses to tropical storms. Use a named example of a tropical storm to show its effects and responses. How monitoring, prediction, protection and planning can reduce the effects of tropical storms. The UK is affected by a number of weather hazards. An overview of types of weather hazard experienced in the UK. Extreme weather events in the UK have impacts on human activity. An example of a recent extreme weather event in the UK to illustrate: causes social, economic and environmental impacts how management strategies can reduce risk. Evidence that weather is becoming more extreme in the UK. 3.1.1.4 Climate change Key idea Specification content Climate change is the result of natural and human factors, and has a range of effects . Evidence for climate change from the beginning of the Quaternary period to the present day. Possible causes of climate change: natural factors – orbital changes, volcanic activity and solar output human factors – use of fossil fuels, agriculture and deforestation. Overview of the effects of climate change on people and the environment. Managing climate change involves both mitigation (reducing causes) and adaptation (responding to change). Managing climate change: mitigation – alternative energy production, carbon capture, planting trees, international agreements adaptation – change in agricultural systems, managing water supply, reducing risk from rising sea levels. 3.1.2 Section B: The living world In this section, students are required to study Ecosystems , Tropical rainforests and one from Hot deserts or Cold environments . 3.1.2.1 Ecosystems Key idea Specification content Ecosystems exist at a range of scales and involve the interaction between biotic and abiotic components. An example of a small scale UK ecosystem to illustrate the concept of interrelationships within a natural system, an understanding of producers, consumers, decomposers, food chain, food web and nutrient cycling. The balance between components. The impact on the ecosystem of changing one component. An overview of the distribution and characteristics of large scale natural global ecosystems. 3.1.2.2 Tropical rainforests Key idea Specification content Tropical rainforest ecosystems have a range of distinctive characteristics. The physical characteristics of a tropical rainforest. The interdependence of climate, water, soils, plants, animals and people. How plants and animals adapt to the physical conditions. Issues related to biodiversity. Deforestation has economic and environmental impacts. Changing rates of deforestation. A case study of a tropical rainforest to illustrate: causes of deforestation – subsistence and commercial farming, logging, road building, mineral extraction, energy development, settlement, population growth impacts of deforestation – economic development , soil erosion, contribution to climate change. Tropical rainforests need to be managed to be sustainable. Value of tropical rainforests to people and the environment. Strategies used to manage the rainforest sustainably – selective logging and replanting, conservation and education, ecotourism and international agreements about the use of tropical hardwoods, debt reduction. 3.1.2.3 Hot deserts Key idea Specification content Hot desert ecosystems have a range of distinctive characteristics. The physical characteristics of a hot desert. The interdependence of climate, water, soils, plants, animals and people. How plants and animals adapt to the physical conditions. Issues related to biodiversity. Development of hot desert environments creates opportunities and challenges. A case study of a hot desert to illustrate: development opportunities in hot desert environments: mineral extraction, energy, farming, tourism challenges of developing hot desert environments: extreme temperatures, water supply, inaccessibility. Areas on the fringe of hot deserts are at risk of desertification. Causes of desertification – climate change, population growth, removal of fuel wood, overgrazing, over-cultivation and soil erosion. Strategies used to reduce the risk of desertification – water and soil management, tree planting and use of appropriate technology. 3.1.2.4 Cold environments Key idea Specification content Cold environments (polar and tundra) have a range of distinctive characteristics. The physical characteristics of a cold environment. The interdependence of climate, permafrost, soils, plants, animals and people. How plants and animals adapt to the physical conditions. Issues related to biodiversity. Development of cold environments creates opportunities and challenges. A case study of a cold environment to illustrate: development opportunities in cold environments: mineral extraction, energy, fishing and tourism challenges of developing cold environments: extreme temperature, inaccessibility, provision of buildings and infrastructure. Cold environments are at risk from economic development. The value of cold environments as wilderness areas and why these fragile environments should be protected. Strategies used to balance the needs of economic development and conservation in cold environments – use of technology, role of governments, international agreements and conservation groups. 3.1.3 Section C: Physical landscapes in the UK In this section, students are required to study UK physical landscapes and two from Coastal landscapes in the UK , River landscapes in the UK and Glacial landscapes in the UK . 3.1.3.1 UK physical landscapes Key idea Specification content The UK has a range of diverse landscapes. An overview of the location of major upland/lowland areas and river systems. 3.1.3.2 Coastal landscapes in the UK Key idea Specification content The coast is shaped by a number of physical processes. Wave types and characteristics. Coastal processes: weathering processes – mechanical, chemical mass movement – sliding, slumping and rock falls erosion – hydraulic power, abrasion and attrition transportation – longshore drift deposition – why sediment is deposited in coastal areas. Distinctive coastal landforms are the result of rock type, structure and physical processes. How geological structure and rock type influence coastal forms. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from erosion – headlands and bays, cliffs and wave cut platforms, caves, arches and stacks. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from deposition – beaches, sand dunes, spits and bars. An example of a section of coastline in the UK to identify its major landforms of erosion and deposition. Different management strategies can be used to protect coastlines from the effects of physical processes. The costs and benefits of the following management strategies: hard engineering – sea walls, rock armour, gabions and groynes soft engineering – beach nourishment and reprofiling, dune regeneration managed retreat – coastal realignment. An example of a coastal management scheme in the UK to show: the reasons for management the management strategy the resulting effects and conflicts. 3.1.3.3 River landscapes in the UK Key idea Specification content The shape of river valleys changes as rivers flow downstream. The long profile and changing cross profile of a river and its valley. Fluvial processes: erosion – hydraulic action, abrasion, attrition, solution, vertical and lateral erosion transportation – traction, saltation, suspension and solution deposition – why rivers deposit sediment. Distinctive fluvial landforms result from different physical processes. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from erosion – interlocking spurs, waterfalls and gorges. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from erosion and deposition – meanders and ox-bow lakes. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from deposition – levées, flood plains and estuaries. An example of a river valley in the UK to identify its major landforms of erosion and deposition. Different management strategies can be used to protect river landscapes from the effects of flooding. How physical and human factors affect the flood risk – precipitation, geology, relief and land use. The use of hydrographs to show the relationship between precipitation and discharge. The costs and benefits of the following management strategies: hard engineering – dams and reservoirs, straightening, embankments, flood relief channels soft engineering – flood warnings and preparation, flood plain zoning, planting trees and river restoration . An example of a flood management scheme in the UK to show: why the scheme was required the management strategy the social, economic and environmental issues. 3.1.3.4 Glacial landscapes in the UK Key idea Specification content Ice was a powerful force in shaping the physical landscape of the UK. Maximum extent of ice cover across the UK during the last ice age. Glacial processes: freeze-thaw weathering erosion – abrasion and plucking movement and transportation – rotational slip and bulldozing deposition – why glaciers deposit sediment (till and outwash). Distinctive glacial landforms result from different physical processes. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from erosion – corries, arêtes, pyramidal peaks, truncated spurs, glacial troughs, ribbon lakes and hanging valleys. Characteristics and formation of landforms resulting from transportation and deposition – erratics, drumlins, types of moraine. An example of an upland area in the UK affected by glaciation to identify its major landforms of erosion and deposition. Glaciated upland areas provide opportunities for different economic activities, and management strategies can be used to reduce land use conflicts. An overview of economic activities in glaciated upland areas – tourism, farming, forestry and quarrying. Conflicts between different land uses, and between development and conservation. An example of a glaciated upland area in the UK used for tourism to show: the attractions for tourists social, economic and environmental impacts of tourism strategies used to manage the impact of tourism.